java c
CVEN90051 CIVIL HYDRAULICS 
Module    1:    CHANNEL HYDRAULICS AND HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES 
LEARNING GUIDE Topic 2
Topic 2: Flow transitions
Gradually varied flow, backwater curves, standard step method
Learning objectives 
•             Explain   and   quantify the   effect of channel structures   and   transitions   on   water   depths;
•             Recognise when   a   hydraulic jump will occur,   determine the   depth   after   the jump   and   the   energy   loss   that   occurs;
•             Estimate   height and   length   of the jump;
•          Consolidate   understanding   of   water   surface   profiles   in   gradually   varied   flow   (GVF);
• Implement the standard step   and/or   direct   step   methods to   determine   water   depth   in   GVF.
Introduction In   Topic   #1,   we   discussed    uniform   flows,   which   occur   when   the   water   depth   and   cross   section   do    not   change   with   distance. In natural   channels, however,   cross   sections   and bottom slopes   are not   constant. This   also happens in   constructed   channels,   when   there   is   the   need   to   suit the   existing   topographical   conditions   for   economic   reasons   (slope   change)   or   deploy   structures   to   control   the   discharge.   Changes   in   the   channel   geometry   or   obstructions   produce   non-   uniform   flows,   which   develop   while   transitioning   from   one   uniform   flow   condition   to   another.   These   flow   conditions   are   called gradually varying flows if   the   rate   of   variation   of   depth   with   respect   to   distance   is   small,   and rapidly varying flows if the   rate   of variation   is   large.   In   other   words, the   flow   depth   changes   gradually   over   a   long   distance   in   gradually   varying flows   and   in   a short   distance   in   rapidly varying flows.
QUESTION: Can you   name   a   case   of   rapidly varying flow?The   complexity   of   natural   or   man-made   channels   is   shown   in   Figure   1   below,   where   several   structures/obstructions   affecting   the   flow   are   reported.   The   aim   of   Module   #1   is   to   provide   enough   knowledge   to   compute   water   levels   and   design   hydraulic   structures.   The   former   are   fundamental   to   make   sure   water   remains   within   the   river/channel   and   it   does   not   overflow the   banks. The   latter   are   key to   control   discharge   and,   hence, water   levels.
FOOD-FOR-THOUGHT: What   happens   to   the   water   when   it   encounters   a   barrier   (e.g.   a   dam)?   Are   there   any   analogies   in transport   engineering?   (Think   of what   happens when   an   accident occur on   the   freeway).
Questions to guide your reading 
•            What   determines   water   levels   in   a   channel?
•             How   would   you   know   if   water   level   in   a   channel   is   being   influenced   by   a   structure?
•            What   is the   hydraulic jump   and when   does   it occur?
•            What   are   control   points?   How   do   you   locate   them?
•             How   do   you   implement   the   standard   step   and   direct   step   methods,   and   under   what   circumstances?
Reading guide The   reading   material   is the primary source to   understand the   subject. The   reading   material   for   Topic   #2   is   available   through   “Reading    Online”    in       LMS. The    material    is   extrapolated   from   the   textbook:      Hamill,      L.,   2011.      Understanding      hydraulics.   Macmillan   International   Higher   Education. Read part on non-uniform flow pp. 266-296. 
Figure 1: Types of flowThe   reading   starts   with Section 8.10,   which   introduces   the   concept   of   flow   transition   (i.e.   from   slow   to   fast      from   fast to   slow). The   acceleration   of the flow   is   straightforward   and   means the flow   switch   from   sub   to   super   critical.   Less   trivial   is   the   transition   from   super   to   sub   critical   as   this   require   a   dissipation   of   energy.   This   latter   transition   is   discussed   in   detail   in Section 8.10.2,   which      introduces   a   very    important   type    of    rapidly   varying   flow: the    hydraulic jump.    In    general   terms,   the   hydraulic   jump   induces   a   dissipation   of   energy   that   slows   down   the   flow,   allowing   the   transition   from   super   to   sub   critical   conditions.   The   momentum   equation   is   the   fundamental   background   knowledge   that   is   used   to   describe   the   hydraulic   jump.   Section 8.10.2   provides   key equations without any   derivation.   An   example   of   hydraulic jump   is   presented   in   Figure   2   below.
NOTE: You   have   probably   studied   the   hydraulic   jump   already   in   Fluid   Mechanics.   Here   we   recall   the   concept   to   refresh   your   memory and   provide some   key equations that   will   help   with   some   exercises.
Figure 2: Example of   hydraulic jump.
The   key   concept   of the   hydraulic jump   is   provided   in   Figure   8.25   of the   reading   material   (also   replicated   in   Figure   3   below). The   change of depth occurs through   an   intense turbulent   dissipation.OBSERVATION: If   we   are   in   a   super-critical   regime,   a   reduction   of   energy   would   increase   the   depth.   This   is   exactly   what   we   want to   switch from   super to   sub-critical,   right?   But   once we   reach   the   critical   depth,   we   need   to   inject   energy   into   the   system   to force the flow to   become sub-critical.   Is   it   possible????
Pay attention to this extract from   the   reading:“   … the depth initially increases gradually from D1    towards DC [switching   from   super-critical   to   critical], then before it attains this depth the hydraulic jump occurs at energy level E2 with the flow switching to a depth D2 on the upper, subcritical part of the depth–specific energy curve (Fig. 8.25b). As a result of the loss of energy, DE, in the jump, the sequent or conjugate depth of flow after the jump, D2, is less than the alternate depth vertically above    E1    that    would    otherwise    have occurred. This energy    loss means that the hydraulic jump cannot be analysed simply with either the depth–specific energy curve or the energy equation.” 
Figure 3: Initial   depth   D1,   sequent   depth   D2   and   energy   loss   DE:   (left   panel)   at   the   hydraulic   jump,   and   (right   pane代 写CVEN90051 CIVIL HYDRAULICS Module 1: CHANNEL HYDRAULICS AND HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES Topic 2
代做程序编程语言l)   on   the   depth–specific energy diagram   [after Webber   (1971)]The   hydraulic jump   is   extremely turbulent.   It   is   characterized   by the   development   of   large-scale turbulence,   surface waves   and   spray,   energy   dissipation   and   air   entrainment. The   large-scale turbulence   region   is   usually   called the “   roller”. The flow   within   a   hydraulic   jump    is    extremely    complicated    and    it    is    not   required   usually    to    consider   its   details.    To    evaluate    the   basic    flow   properties   and   energy   losses   in such   a   region, the   momentum   principle   is   used.
ADDITIONAL REFERENCE:   For   more   rigorous   mathematical   details   on   the   hydraulic   jump,   see Chaudhry, M.H., 2007. Open- channel flow. Springer Science  Business Media (available through the   library).
Applications   of the   momentum   equation   allow   the   derivation   of   quadratic   equations   that   links   the   depth   before   and   after   the   hydraulic   jump   (see equations 8.36 and   8.37).
where   F   is the   Froude   number. These equations form. the   base for   solving   exercises   involving the   hydraulic jump.
ADD-ON: An   interesting   addition to    the   reading   material   is the table   reported   in   Figure   3   below.   This   provides   some   details   on   the different types   of jump.
What   about the   length   of the   hydraulic jump? There   are   several   empirical   expressions   based   on   laboratory   experiments. Table   8.5   in the   reading   material an   easy approach. What   if you   are   in   between   those   conditions? Just   interpolate!
FOOD-FOR-THOUGHT: How   can   we   force   the   jump   to   occur?   See   an   example   in   figure   8.26   in   the   reading   material.   Can   you   think of a   simpler   solution?Section 8.11 introduces   the   gradually   varied   flows.   The   key   concept   to   remember   is   that   an   obstruction   induces   a   gradual   variation   of   the   flow   with   a   consequent   changes   of   water   profile,   which   is   no   longer   parallel   to   the   bed   slope.   There   are   methods   to   compute   the   water   surface   profile.   It   is   also   important   to   get   a   qualitative   idea   of   the   water   profile.   A   general   discussion   is   presented   in Section 8.11.1,   after   which   you   should   be   able   to   produce   an   educated   guess   of   water   profiles.   A   summary   of   the   different   type   of   profiles   is   reported   in   Figure   4   below.   To   draw   profiles   (or   compute   them),   you   will   need   to   start from   control   points. These are discussed   in Section 8.11.2.
FOOD-FOR-THOUGHT: So,   go   back   to   an   earlier   question:   what   happens   when   the   water   flow   impact   against   a   dam?   What   profile   do you think   it will form?There are 2 methods to compute the water profiles with very little   difference   between them Sections 8.11.3-4 introduce the standard step method. Section 8.11.5 introduces the direct step method. These sections are better   comprehended through   exercise.   Practice   before your workshop and ask   question   to   clarify   any   doubts.
QUESTIONS: What are the differences   between these   two   methods?   Which   is   the   best   one?
Section 8.12 introduce   the   concept   of   surge.   This   is   a   perturbation   that   propagate   over   the   surface.   Go   through   it   during your   reading,   but   it   is   a   bit   marginal   in this   module.   (But, of course, do   NOT   neglect   this   section!).  
Figure 3: Classification of the   hydraulic jump.   (Note that y1   andy2   are   equivalent   to   D1   and   D2   in   previous   figures).
Figure 4: Classification of water   profiles.   (Note that   y   is   the   water   depth   D).
Practice problems 
1.                A   colleague   claims that the flow   resistance   (shear   stress)   of   channel   surfaces   can   be   neglected   in   the   analysis   of   rapidly varied   flow   but   should   be   considered   in   the   analysis   of gradually   varied flow.   Do you agree with this   claim?
2.             A   hydraulic jump occurs   in   a   rectangular   channel   5   m   wide.   The   depths   immediately   upstream   and   downstream of the jump are observed to   be,   respectively, 0.25   m   and   1.0   m.
a)               Calculate the flow   rate   in the channel.
b)             Calculate the   fractional   energy   loss   across   the   hydraulic jump.
c)               Can you estimate the channel   slope?
3.                A   rectangular   channel   of width   2   m   carries   a flow   of   1.2   m3/s. The   Manning’s n is   0.02. As   shown   in the   following   diagram, the   water flows   down   a   slope S1      =   0.002,   then the   slope   changes to S2      =0.0015, then the   water   eventually flows   over   a   sharp   crested   overflow. Assume   the   second   section is   long enough for the flow to come to normal   depth.  
In week   1   (practice   Exercise #5), we   calculated   normal and   critical   depth for   each   slope.   We   also   determined   the   flow   condition   on   each   slope.   Now,   draw the water surface   profile,   labelling   each   GVF   profile type.
4.                For   the   channel   in   the    previous   question,   calculate   how   far    upstream   of   the   overflow   a   depth   of   0.45   m   occurs   (only   use one   step for simplicity).
5.                Consider   gradually   varied   flow   of   water    in   a   wide   rectangular   irrigation   channel   with   a   discharge   per   unit   width   of   5   m2/s,   a   slope   of   0.01,   and   a   Manning’s n coefficient   of   0.02. The   flow   is   initially   at   uniform   depth. At   a given location, x =   0, the flow   enters   a   200   m   length   of   channel where   lack   of   maintenance   has   resulted   in   an   increased   Manning’s n of 0.03.   Following this stretch of channel, the   roughness   returns to the initial (maintained) value. 
(a)                               Calculate the normal and critical depths of the flow for the two distinct segments.
(b)                               Describe,   qualitatively,   the    behaviour   of   the   water   surface   along   the   channel.
(c)                                  As   accurately   as   possible,   determine the   flow   depths   at   the   locations x =   40   m   and   240   m.







         
加QQ：99515681  WX：codinghelp  Email: 99515681@qq.com
